# Lecture 0: On Files


At the very beginning of our consideration of digital production, we need to talk about *files*. Because files are fundamental to digital production. Or are they?

## File Management

A file is a **metaphor** for a bundle of data in a computer. Files do not actually exist in your computer, or on its hard drive (which is not in fact hard). The file is a *user-interface metaphor* that shapes a set of behaviours around how we deal with digital media. The files metaphor is closely related to the idea of "documents," but not exactly equivalent.

The idea of files dates to the late 1960s, early 1970s, and was popularized through the spread of the Unix operating system (which is still with us). The metaphor has been around so long that it has become completely naturalized. We treat files as if they are the natural way of dealing with information on computers. It's worth noting that alternative metaphors (or patterns) are becoming more common: streams; queries; things pulled together on the fly out of databases. But files always seem to be there, as permanent or semi-permanent things.

Files are typically organized in **Filesystems**. The system we all take for granted is the "hierarchical file system," where there is a hierarchical set of "folders" and folders within folders that uniquely locate and organize files. It seems natural because it's been with us for decades, but it's doesn't have to be this way.

Inside a file is data. Typically, files have two parts. The "header" of the file, which you usually don't see, is a bundle of data that identifies the file and provides some basic metadata so that your operating system (and you) can make sense of it. Following the header is the part you do see: a bundle of data that represents the content of the file: a text, an image, a sound, your taxes, a set of database relations, or whatever.

For the most part, files are *dumb*. They can't do anything; they sit there passively until operated on by an **application**, which can open, read, edit, manipulate, and/or save the file.

There are as many **file types** as there are pieces of software, more or less. Which is to say gazillions of them. File **standards** are the exception not the rule, and so every different version of a word processor has its own file types. The result is files that are eventually being unusable, or at least only partially usable, if they aren't opened by the exact application that they were designed for.

There are, notably, a handful of important file standards, where file types work across a number of different applications and aren't bound to a single app:

**Text files**, made up only of lines of text characters. This was the old standard for Unix files, and these are, handily, mostly human-readable. Sometimes text files have a specific internal format: e.g., .csv spreadsheets.

**XML files**, which are text files with specific structures expressed in them. XML files are theoretically openable and usable by any XML-aware application. In reality it's not quite so simple.

**Image, sound, and video files** that we pass around on the Internet (JPGs, PNGs, MP3s, MOVs, etc.). Since the early Internet was pluralistic enough to demand **open file formats** that a variety of different tools and applications could all use. These are structured bundles of, for the most part, *sampled* data about images, sounds, etc. More about this below...

**Defacto common standards** like .docx files are *sort-of* open and *sort of* interoperable, but they are still largely controlled by Microsoft and Adobe. They have achieved standards-like status because they are ubiquitous.

## So many files! How can I manage?

So we live in a universe populated by zillions of files, over various types, and all more or less organized in hierarchical folders.

**File naming** is, for the most part, an unregulated business. There is a common practice wherein we use a particular 3- or 4-letter code at the end of the filename to indicade the file type (e.g. ".txt" or ".pdf"). But it's not a formal standard; it's just how most people and some software recognizes things. Your computer's operating system probably uses the filename ending to figure out which application to use if you double-click on the file icon.

What you put before the dot in a file name is completely up to you. The trouble is, obviously, that your computer (and your inbox) eventually fills up with things like `untitled.docx` or `final.xlsx`, or worse: `FINALfinal.pdf`.

People commonly like to use short, easily typed filenames and then rely on the enclosing folder name for context. This, of course, falls apart as soon as you take the file out of that folder and send it to someone.

Regular computer filesystems, for the most part, do not track the history of changes to files. If I have two files, both named `final.docx`, I might have a clue about which one is final-er than the other by comparing the date in the file metadata; but that date might only reflect when the file was *sent to me* rather than when it was actually edited. 

There *are* systems for **tracking changes** -- or **versions** -- in files and filesystems, and they are definitely worth using. Generally, this means going to the trouble of doing so. Which is why this isn't more commonly used.

A good old DIY workaround for this is to embed version information directly in the filename, like `final-JMax-Dec13.docx` -- It's hardly foolproof, but it might be better than nothing.

So we live in a universe with zillions of files and, at best, there are some folk practices half-heartedly applied to help us manage them all.

## Content Management concepts and software

Part of what's so successful about the "file" metaphor is that it allows us to think of digital things *as if they were paper documents*. One implication of this practice is that we don't tend to think of a file as existing in more than once place at once. We also don't really think of them as dynamic. If a file changes, we like to think of it as a new version of that file, as opposed to the same file, with history. even "track changes" in Word seems more like a set of scribbles in a file rather than actually "tracking" changes.

**Content management systems** (CMS) break some of these conceptual limitations. Instead of files living in hierarchies of folders -- on my computer, on your computer, in your inbox, or in my inbox -- a CMS keeps a file in one central online place, and anyone who needs to see it, work on it, etc. comes to it, rather than a copy of the file travelling to them. Therefore multiple people can all be accessing the same file at once. That necessitates keeping track of changes to the file -- if you and I are both editing it, what happens, and when?

There are lots of different kinds of content management systems. **Wordpress** is one kind. **Dropbox** is another kind. **Google Drive** is another. And **Github** is yet another. Each makes different trade-offs between the kind of flexibility it offers, against how far it breaks the paper-document metaphor. 

Note that content management systems are almost all *text* management systems. It's fairly easy to track all changes to a text, compared with, say, changes to an image file.

## Where are your files?

Take a minute and look at the filesystem on your computer. At the root level is your 'hard drive' (which hasn't been hard since about 2008), and inside that are system files (the operating system for Windows or Mac), and then a folder for user files, inside which will be your own folder, probably named the same as your login on the computer.

Inside that folder is all your stuff... sometimes it'll be neatly organized in "Documents" and "Images" and "Music" and sometimes it'll be a mess of disorganized files. The better you understand where things are in this system, the less time you'll spend hunting for things! 

Modern operating systems make it easy to make a mess... in trying to make them 'easy' to use, they make it easy to misfile things. Imagine just throwing your clothes into a closet; the easiest thing to find will be the last thing you threw in! Or perhaps you have a small elf (named "search") that will look for things for you. Maybe it will find them! Maybe not! 

Cloud-storage services like Dropbox and Google Drive, OneDrive or iCloud, make things more complicated too... by encouraging you to not worry about where you store things, you become more dependent on these companies, and less able to organize your own work. Google Drive in particular is notorious: it encourages you to throw your files in to a dark closet, without any sense of where they might be. 

You don't have to live like this. Take a few seconds to think about folders, and where you want files to be, so that you're in control of them.


