## In the beginning was Unix.

Unix is an operating system that gave us almost all of our ideas about how computers should work. It is over 50 years old, but it is still with us.

When Apple made the first Macintosh in 1984, they tried to leave Unix behind with the introduction of their "graphical user interface" but when Steve Jobs returned to Apple in 1998, he said, "We need Unix." And it has been in Mac OS ever since.

When Bill Gates started Microsoft in 1979, he tried to make a system that worked like Unix but for legal reasons separate from Unix. But it works basically the same way. Except the punctuation is backwards.

When Linus Torvals wanted to create a shared, non-commercial opperating system in the 1990s, he wrote **Linux** -- an almost identical version of Unix, written with open-licenced code. This is today the dominant version of Unix.

Unix is everywhere. It's in your iPhone. Its in Android. Its in your car, and your Smart Refrigerator. It powers the entire internet. At the bottom of the planet-sized large-language models that power the AI billionaires are servers running Unix. 

You can't do anything technical without understanding at least Unix's basic concepts. These are not so tough, though, because you've grown up with them.

> Unix is the Latin of computer science. Except it ain't dead yet.

Unix gave us two very important metaphors: **folders** and **files**

These two metaphors are fundamental to almost everything we do.

Folders are containers; they contain files.

Folders also contain other folders.

A file system is, ever since Unix, a tree structure of folders inside folders. At the root of your "drive" there are folders, and within them subfolders, containing all the things.

Files are the basic unit of computing, for most purposes. There have been other ways of thinking about computing, but this is the one that stuck. This is a concept we get from Unix.

---

In Unix, files were meant to be composed of **plain text**. Even in fancy computer languages and system configuration, most files are made of plain text. That way, software is mostly a matter of *reading, parsing, and writing* text. 

That was Wisdom.

Many other systems, especially those created by Apple, Microsoft, Adobe, and others, abandoned that wisdom, and tried to hide the internals of the computer. Often for commercial reasons.

But we haven't really lost that ideal; in fact, we've come back to it in recent years. 

You can, I hope, see how a system made up of text might be useful for publishing. And for literate people.

This course is all about folders and files made of text, and all the things we can do with them.

This is not complicated. It is simple. If we try to hold to what is simple, we will be able to progress and achieve great things without our heads exploding.

Computing and digital media often are made to seem complex; indeed, there has been a lot of money made through creating and managing -- that is, *controlling* -- complexity.

But over the past decade or so, millions of people working on software and the Internet have come around to the idea that things can be simple -- and are much better when they are simple. The better parts of computing are those which have come through years of complexity to rediscover the simple.

There is wisdom in simplicity, but it requires that we be ever vigilant for complex thinking -- we always have to look for the simple structures and systems. If things are getting to complex for our little heads, we need to step back, take a breath, and look for how it could be simpler. It doesn't always work out, but it's an ideal we should hold to.

This course plots a path through the weeds of complexity -- which are all around us -- to find Simple ways of producing publications in a variety of modes.



