
## Using Unix

Remember I said, "In the beginning was Unix" -- not exactly the beginning, but long enough ago (early 1970s) and important enough to be foundational to everything else, and *still* today the way most tech people operate, at least in part.

On a Mac, there is Unix running under all the windows and menus. You can get to it, and deal with it directly, through an app called "Terminal," which you'll find in your Applications/Utilities folder.

On Windows, you get to the Microsoft kinda-like-Unix environment through the "Command prompt" -- the Microsoft version is a little different, but close enough for PUB607.

Try that. Open up either the Terminal app or the Command Prompt. You'll see a little, boring white-on-black (or perhaps black on white) screen, with a little blinking prompt, waiting for you to type something. 

We're in the 1970s again, or maybe the 1980s, in one of those early 
"hacker" movies. Lots of coders today make their terminal colours green on black because... well, it's a look.

Unix at its heart is a text-based environment. 

This should not worry a group of graduate-level editors and publishers. You can do this.

This text-based user interface is called the "shell" for reasons that are not interesting enough to go into. I'm going to call it the **shell** from now on.

You type commands, and pass information to the system, and it responds with information back. The shell is a parser. It separates what you type into 'tokens' and figures out what to do with it. Generally, the first token it finds will be taken as a 'command' -- that is, the name of some program that does something -- and any subsequent tokens are 'arguments' that provide information, context, specifics.

Sometimes that's like a query and an answer. For example, to list the files in this folder. `ls` is a command -- *list the files* -- and -l tells it to give you a long-form answer: all the details!

    ls

    ls -l 

Weirdly, the same thing on Windows is:

    dir

Sometimes the command is about changing the environment, say, by moving to a different folder. `cd` does that, and so we need to tell it what folder to change to.

    cd someSubFolder

If you're perceptive, you'll notice that there is no "f" for folder in these examples. I'm sorry for this complexity, but old command prompt systems, developed before computers had cute little icons, called them "directories" instead of folders. So it's 'cd' to "change directory." Again, I apologize, but the bare fact is that *folders are directories* and *directories are folders*; we just get used to it.

And sometimes, in Unix, we are asking for the system to process a text, or to run an application program on a file; in response, we want some new output: a report of what it did, or perhaps a whole new file.

    wc myLifeStory.txt

That'll count the words (wc: "word count") in the file containing my life story. It will repond with some numbers: how many lines, words, and characters are in the file.



### Unix is a machine built of text

In Unix:

- Everything is either a file or it behaves like one;

- The basic file format is newline-delimited text;

- The output of one process can become the input of another;

- A "shell" environment provides a textual means of interacting;

- System documentation (manuals) are part of the system itself.

Let's try out the parser. Please work through the notes in "OYO-ExploringTheShell" and "OYO-unixCommands" and get familiar with this way of working!

OYO = "On your own."
