## Homework: Installing and Using Pandoc

1) Once you're comfortable moving around folders in the shell, make a new folder for this course. 

   Don't call it 'pub607' because we're going to use that name later. Call it something else -- it doesn't really matter: 'unixstuff' or 'techproject' or 'bananas.'

2) Download and install Pandoc from <https://pandoc.org/installing.html> -- it's pretty easy.

   You'll need to figure out which thing to download. On Windows, I think you should choose the **.msi** version.  On Mac, I recommend the **.pkg** version, but you also have to choose which kind. If your Mac is brand new (M1, M2, etc) choose the arm64 version; but if your laptop is a little older (like mine, with an Intel chip) choose the "x86-64" one.

   That should give you an "installer" to click through, which should give you some confirmation that all is well.

   Pandoc is a modern, extremely useful Unix tool that no publisher should be without. It is a 'universal document converter' -- but that label really underplays what Pandoc is capable of.

3) Once you've got it installed, *test it from the shell*. Ask it what version it is:

        pandoc --version

   That should tell you some information about the version you have installed. At the very least, this will confirm that it is indeed installed.

4) In the new folder that you created, place the .docx version of the essay that you've chosen to contribute to this course. 

   I recommend giving it a short, simple filename: something like *yournameEssay.docx*

5) Use pandoc to convert the file to 'markdown' plain text:

        pandoc yournameEssay.docx -o yournameEssay.md --wrap=none

   Don't forget that `-o` It works a little like Unix file redirection, but it says explicitly to Pandoc: "Put your output in this file!"

   Have a look at the resulting file in your text editor.

 6) Read as much of the [Pandoc User's Guide](https://pandoc.org/MANUAL.html) as you can stomach. It's OK if you skim; it's about one hundred pages long. 

    I have been known to say that "*A close reading of Pandoc's manual page is the equivalent of a degree in document production.*" But isn't that what you're here for? Don't be shy!



