# Accessibility in EBooks

Critically, if we're trying to export EPUBs from a tool like InDesign, the more complicated the original layouts, the more likely the EPUB is going to be a mess. This is because InDesign is a supremely sophisticated visual layout tool. It was designed to do that, and it has evolved over dozens of versions to do that extremely well. It was not designed to produce structured, HTML content; it does that as an afterthought. 

So a simple, single-column, non-illustrated novel might be a pretty simple export. It might come off unproblematically, *especially* if the designer was ruthlessly consistent with using named paragraph and character styles, which allows the export to do things consistently. 

But if the layout is more complicated; if there has been a lot of tweaking; if there are (god forbid) drop caps; then the export is more likely to be problematic, requiring more debugging afterward.

The extreme end of this spectrum is the so-called "fixed-layout" EPUB, in which pains are taken to preserve the layout itself, so that page spreads stay put, nothing moves, and images and other elements can be precisely positioned, as if they were on paper. These things are a nightmare, and should, frankly, never be attempted by sane people. InDesign will export them for you if you ask. But frankly, if perfect layout is what's required, there's a mature, well-supported standard for that: PDF.

This is *all about accessibility.* Consider, for a moment, trying to use screen-reader software to read your ebook. The screen reader software has to be able to navigate the layout, the typographic hierarchy, internal navigation, and body copy. 

If the text is straightforward and linear, it is easy for the screen reader to do this (and especially easy if the HTML has been put together with just a smidge of forethought). The more complex the EPUB, though -- which will be because of the complexity of the starting documents -- the harder it will be for the screen reader.

Once again, if we start from a solid foundation -- a text-based format where *What You See Is All There Is* -- then it is *trivially* easy to produce an accessible ebook. 

Because back in the 1980s, when the original SGML specification was being designed and deliberated, accessibility was a key priority. The people who invented modern markup had accessibility in mind from the beginning.

It's somewhat ironic that people think they've invented the "born accessible" ebook in the 2020s; this was actually invented in the 1980s, and all we're doing is remembering how to do it today.

The best practices outlined at AccessiblePublishing.ca -- <https://www.accessiblepublishing.ca/accessible-publishing-best-practices/> -- are almost all there for free if we start with a clean, minimal markup (e.g., markdown) production path. See the "Guidance on
EPUB Accessibility" PDF in this folder as well.


## EPUB Metadata

Unlike web pages, which are part of a gigantic global network, EPUBs are units designed to move through a supply chain. They need a set of metadata to allow them to be seen, categorized, and sold through that chain. There is a metadata aspect to accessibility, too, as you're working to make your publication usable and findable in as many ways as possible.

There are a lot of ways of going about this, but since we've been using Pandoc, why wouldn't we use Pandoc for this too? Pandoc allows us to write metadata in a format called YAML, that looks like this:

```yaml
---
title: My Life Story
publisher: Too Many Books, Inc.
date: Feb 30, 2025 
...
---
```

Nice and readable. There is a larger, more comphensive example you can peruse in `metadata-example.yaml`

Pandoc will read the YAML-formatted data into a set of fields and, when it generates the EPUB file, will stick these fields in the right place; they should appear in your Reader software!

## Accessibility Metadata

The best guide I've found for how to declare accessibility features is at:
<https://w3c.github.io/publ-a11y/package-metadata-authoring-guide/>

These are mostly declarations. Have a look at `metadata-example.yaml` for some examples of how to do this in a plain, simple (text + images) ebook. Of course if you add multimedia features, you will need to think harder about accessibility.

Note that a *Table of contents* comes standard in any EPUB3 file -- it gets generated out of the raw files by the reading application. So you can always claim a `tableOfContents` in your `accesibilityFeatures` -- *but* if you wanted to also include a table of contents within the text of the book, you can ask Pandoc to make one for you by saying `--toc=true` on the command line.
