## Pandoc

Let's go back to the idea of a **parser**.

In the Unix shell, the command you type in gets taken apart into "tokens" -- separated by spaces -- and interpreted into some kind of machine-readable instruction. That's not so complicated.

But parsers do much more complicated jobs than that. For instance, when you open up a .docx file in MSWord, the file gets parsed into all the meaningful bits that MSWord uses to do its thing. Same with InDesign, or Excel, or anthing else. A little of that is about parsing the words you've typed in, but almost all of it is about the structural components into which those words fit.

Commercial computer applications like Word and InDesign have their own internal structures, and their software parses their own stuff and writes out their own structures when you save a file. Those structures are proprietary. That's pretty good for their business: it keeps you using their software, and sharing their files around so everyone else has to use it too.

And this is precisely why open, text-based file formats are important. It was the reason the Pentagon mandated using SGML back in the 1980s, and it still makes good sense today. It's why HTML files are made of plain text. And it's why markdown -- which is even plainer text -- is such a powerful thing.

One of the key pieces of software we will use with markdown is **Pandoc** -- which bills itself as the "universal document converter."  <https://pandoc.org>

The current popularity of open, text-based formats makes a tool like **Pandoc** possible. Pandoc is, essentially, a universal parser. It has a modular design with parts that have been developed to *read* (that is, parse) just about any common document format. It has a second set of modules than can write (*save*) any of those formats. In the middle is an elegant internal structure that is common to most document formats: this piece could only be dreamt of back in 1988 or 1998; but it was possible to actually build in 2008, when Pandoc was first launched -- because we collectively had enough experience with designing document formats by then. Pandoc's way of seeing documents is the *distillation* of 40+ years of document-production software history.

What that means is that it takes any structured (or even semi-structured) text-based file format, and parses it into an internal representation. That internal representation can then be re-written in any other structured document format.

Pandoc is extremely high-quality software, and it is *exquisitely* well documented. I have often said that "*a close reading of the Pandoc user manual would constitute a whole course in document production.*" Since you're currently taking a course in ebook production, it would be a good idea to at least familiarize yourself with Pandoc's incredibly well-written User's Manual: <https://pandoc.org/MANUAL.html>

Pandoc, it must be said, has a command-line interface. That means you use it by typing commands into a command shell, like it's 1983 all over again. You have one of these, remember: on a Mac, it's called "Terminal." On Windows, it's called "Command prompt."

It's probably not the way you're used to working, but the command-line interface actually really works incredibly well, especially for text processing, because it was invented for text processing. Embrace your inner geek! 

## "Semi-structured" document formats

Pandoc can read (parse) a Word .docx file. It can convert that to another format directly -- like an Ebook. But chances are it won't work well... it's worth dwelling on why that is.

The old saying goes, "garbage in, garbage out." If you feed Pandoc a file that's poorly put together (and lots of Word files are poorly put together), it won't give us very good results. 

Why are Word files often poorly put together? Because Word allows us (or even *encourages* us) to do that. Rather than thinking about document structure as we write and edit, Word invites us to make arbitary formatting decisions, willy-nilly, as we go. That was a highly marketable feature back in the 1990s: *You have control! You can make it look any way you like!*

Here's a simple example: *indented paragraphs*. How do we make paragraphs indented? There are at least three or four different ways to achieve that. 

1. The old typewriter method: at the start of every paragraph, you type four spaces, and then start the first sentence. 

2. You could instead hit the Tab key at the beginning of every paragraph.

3. Use the "ruler" at the top of Word, with the three little marks indicating where the left margin, right margin, and first-line start are supposed to be. You could, for each paragraph, set these locations in the ruler. 

4. Use the "Styles" feature, and specify the the "Default" style (or whatever) for margins and spacing, with the first-line indent as part of that.

Of those four options, the first two make paragraph indents *part of the text itself*. The second two are independent of the text, making styling choices without getting into the content. And only the last option is really *regular* (that is, not arbitary).

When I say Word docs are often poorly put together, I mean that arbitrary formatting messes with a parser's ability to understand the structure of the text. Of the four options described above, the fourth one is the only one likely to work out for us, because it's the only one that consistently separates content from format.

The trouble with Word isn't just method 1, or 2, or 3; it's that it makes *all of them* possible, and it's not apparent, looking at a Word doc, which way it's been accomplished.

This is why we do markup. This is why SGML, and XML, and HTML.

And this is why markdown, which is just a vastly easier way of doing markup. Markdown is almost structurally identical to HTML, but has a much simpler syntax. That has a number of advantages:

- it's easier to look at;
- it's easier to write;
- it's easier to edit;
- it requires no specialized/complicated tools;
- it has a vastly smaller 'margin for error;'
- it's really easy to process and manipulate with search-and-replace;
- it can be unambiguously converted to zillions of other formats;
- it is ubiquitous today.

Next week we will make ebooks. Making ebooks with markdown and pandoc takes a couple of seconds. And then you can use the same markdown file to make a web page. And a PDF. And even a .docx file, if your publisher steadfastly insists on that as a submission format.

## Using Pandoc

Pandoc has no 'graphical user interface'; it runs from the command line, as in the Unix style. You can do this.

Here's a [Unix/Command-shell/Terminal cheat sheet](../0.Files/OYO-unixCommands.md)

Pandoc itself isn't hard to use, once you get the general idea of how it works. Here's a [Pandoc Tutorial](OYO-PandocTutorial.md) 