# Regular Expressions: Textual witchery

Pandoc is terrific, and I think the most useful publishing software I've ever encountered. It's new, and it's actively developed by a whole community of open-source programmers. But it's not everything.

If you're really into delving into ancient caves for secret mysteries, there is also Regular Expressions (or "Regex," however that's pronounced).

Regex is an ancient (again, I mean the 1970s) Unix thing (it's also a thing that's embedded in various tools) that gives you raw, direct access to a text parser.

Sometimes you'll see it called "GREP" after the raw unix version of it.

It is a tiny **formal language**, made up almost entirely of punctuation marks, for finding *regular patterns in text*. And if you can find them, you can also replace them, which is where the real power is. 

What does "regular patterns in text" mean? Think about a (North American) telephone number -- it's a number, but really, its a pattern in text: It has a *three-digit area code*, followed by *three digits*, followed by *four digits*. There may or may not be some *punctuation* (hyphens, parentheses) between those groups of numbers, but you can easily enough imagine that basic pattern that all phone numbers conform to. 

With regular expressions, we can define that pattern, and then hunt through text to find any actual text that conforms to that pattern. For the sake of illustration, the following will match a LOT of different phone number formats:

		\(?\d\d\d\)? ?\d\d\d-?\d\d\d\d

That might look pretty opaque, but it's actualy not that hard to learn the system. Here's what it says:

- maybe there's an opening parenthesis
- then there's 3 digits
- maybe there's a closing parenthesis
- maybe there's a space
- then there's 3 more digits
- maybe there's a dash
- then there's 4 more digits

You can look at the [OYO-RegExTutorial](OYO-RegExTutorial.md) file and it is all explained. 

What other patterns could we search for? How about HTML tags, which come wrapped in `<` and `\>` brackets, and always come in pairs. We could, for instance, find all the "emphasized" phrases in an HTML document by searching for:

		<em>(.*)</em>

The bit in the middle -- `.*`	-- is the RegEx way of saying "whatever": it matches *anything*	that shows up in between `<em>` tags.

*Aside: in actual practice, trying to do this kind of thing with HTML tags quickly gets complicated, which is one of the reasons Markdown is so much nicer to work with: the minimalist syntax makes search-and-replace much easier to design.*

## Searching and replacing with RegEx

You will see RegEx searching in lots of different places, just waiting for you to use it. In fact, if you look, in Sublime Text, at the "Find" or "Find and Replace" panel (it's down at the bottom of the window), you'll see a set of buttons. 

One of those buttons says `.*` (remember, that's the regex way of saying 'whatever') -- clicking that button changes Sublime Text's behaviour from doing a normal, literal search to doing a super-powered magic RegEx search.

And then replace. Anything we find in a RegEx search -- literally anything that shows up between the parentheses in the example above -- can be replaced. 

One could, in fact, use RegEx to convert markdown to HTML. Actually, that's exactly how it's done, inside Pandoc and other tools. But you can also use this directly inside Sublime Text.

It's not just in Sublime Text. If you are clued-in (which you now are), you will find RegEx in LOADS of tools. It's in InDesign, for instance! It's in Google Docs. It's in LibreOffice. It's famously **not** in Word, although, as usual, Microsoft has a thing that kinda works like it, but is different. 

RegEx is in *every* programming language; in *every* text editor; in many, many creative tools that you may already use. You just need to learn how to use it!  See [OYO-RegExTutorial](OYO-RegExTutorial.md), click that button in Sublime Text, and start searching and replacing.

*When I was a young web developer in the 1990s, I made web pages for a living. In those days, HTML had to be written by hand. I quickly learned that if I could automate and regularize some of the production by using search-and-replace to do the boring, boilerplate bits, I could be faster and more efficient. At some point early on, I learned that my text editor (BBEdit, in those days) had RegEx in it. And when I learned that, my web production work got **much** more profitable.*

*I still use it, all the time, to tidy up documents, to convert things that aren't easily converted, to clean up data, to merge things together, to make wholesale changes to multiple files, and so on. This is beyond a magic sword; this one is a magic ring.*

